README.md, before:

# TDA4VM R5F embedded Rust

Work-in-progress infrastructure for Rust firmware targeting the Cortex-R5F cores of TI's J721E family such as the TDA4VM.

## Capabilities

The following is currently implemented:
- Booting from TCM, loaded via remoteproc in Linux
  - Helper macros for generating remoteproc tables
- Logging/panicking to remoteproc trace buffers
- Standard exception handlers
- Configuring and enabling MPU

## Status

This repo is currently **only a proof-of-concept**, and is not useful in practice. I am writing code
in a "demo app" crate and then reformulating it into external driver crates when it makes sense. I
hope to expand it into a family of crates to support functions such as:

- Firmware-facing abstractions for host processor interop (rpmesg, VirtIO)
- GPIO and peripheral access for important features of the chip
- Support for one or more of the common async-based task scheduling frameworks, likely Embassy

For the foreseeable future, I will be testing this only on the BeagleBone AI-64. It is probably
applicable to other boards and SoCs but I don't yet know. Most of what I have written should work
for any Cortex-R5.

I can't make any promises on future expansion; if nothing else, I hope it's a helpful reference for
others' work.

## Why would you want bare metal Rust on coprocessor cores?

The TDA4VM chips target embedded deep learning applications. This makes them very attractive for
mobile robotics applications. However, embedded robotics platforms are minimally useful without
control of actuators and sensors. Linux on Cortex-A cores is great for ease of use with high-level
libraries and tools, but introduces unpredictable scheduling latency, high syscall overhead, and
challenges in software reliability.

For these reasons, I much prefer running control loops, simple sensor fusion and safety-critical
logic in a bare-metal environment. The R5F cores provide an excellent opportunity for this
application, since they have immediate shared memory access and synchronization primitives to
interact with the host CPU.

I'm interested in embedded Rust and its robotics applications, so I figured this would be a good
avenue to explore.

## Setup

```
rustup target add armv7r-none-eabihf
cargo install cargo-make
```

## Usage

Build the demo app:

```
cargo make build
```

Run the demo app (on-device):

```
cp demo-app /lib/firmware/demo-app.elf

echo stop | sudo tee /dev/remoteproc/j7-main-r5f1_0/state
# Ignore "Invalid argument" errors here; this likely means the core is already stopped
echo demo-app.elf | sudo tee /dev/remoteproc/j7-main-r5f1_0/firmware
echo start | sudo tee /dev/remoteproc/j7-main-r5f1_0/state

sudo ls /dev/remoteproc/j7-main-r5f1_0/device/remoteproc/
# Note which remoteproc node name is printed, and substitute it below
# trace0: main debug log
sudo cat /sys/kernel/debug/remoteproc/remoteproc18/trace0
# trace1: panic log
sudo cat /sys/kernel/debug/remoteproc/remoteproc18/trace1
```

## Prior art, references and thanks

I'm reimplementing needed logic from scratch, since there is no canonical Cortex-R runtime,
startup code or other infrastructure for Rust. However, I've drawn on the following as inspiration
and prior art:

- https://github.com/kaofishy/bbai64_cortex-r5_example
- https://github.com/paoloteti/cortex-r-rt
- https://github.com/japaric/ultrascale-plus/tree/master/firmware
- https://github.com/japaric/rm42/tree/master/rt

Additional thanks to Nishanth Menon for help with the family of chips.

Commit message:

Restructure demo app binaries to fix symbol aliasing
Previously, the "boot" app linked in the "main" app as a static library.
This meant that the main app would re-use stdlib and other duped symbols
already defined in the boot portion (the main app didn't bring its own).
This was especially problematic because stdlib components only used by
the main app would be allocated into TCM (since the symbols were provided
by the boot app's copy) and fill it, while DDR had space. Further, panic
handlers and other internal Rust machinery was either erroring due to
re-defined symbols or silently picking an arbitrary one.

We want symbol resolution to be consisitent: the boot app only brings in
the limited set of functions it needs, and the main app can execute
entirely from DDR. We also want better interoperability between the boot
and main apps, rather than only allowing the boot app to reference main
app symbols.

To resolve these limitations, I've done the following:
- Switched the demo app to be a #[no_main] binary crate (same as boot app)
  rather than a lib
- Configured both app portions to link with "--relocatable" so that they
  can have unresolved symbols to be provided by each other
- Configured the linker to treat exported (global, i.e. "extern C")
  as in use for garbage collecting purposes
- Added a "link" cargo-make target which links the two halves together
  and performs final placement

The new structure means that each portion of the app is independently
linked against its own copy of the stdlib and mapped into split ddr/tcm
sections by its local linkerscript. Only the public+extern symbols
remain by the time the two halves are linked together. The top-level
linkerscript does final placement of the sections into memory regions
but can simply glob sections that already have symbols mapped into them
by the first-level linkerscripts.

I have not yet explored ways to share resources (resource table entries)
between the two halves.

README.md, after:

# TDA4VM R5F embedded Rust

Work-in-progress infrastructure for Rust firmware targeting the Cortex-R5F cores of TI's J721E family such as the TDA4VM.

## Capabilities

The following is currently implemented:
- Booting from TCM, loaded via remoteproc in Linux
  - Helper macros for generating remoteproc tables
- Logging/panicking to remoteproc trace buffers
- Standard exception handlers
- Configuring and enabling MPU

## Status

This repo is currently **only a proof-of-concept**, and is not useful in practice. I am writing code
in a "demo app" crate and then reformulating it into external driver crates when it makes sense. I
hope to expand it into a family of crates to support functions such as:

- Firmware-facing abstractions for host processor interop (rpmesg, VirtIO)
- GPIO and peripheral access for important features of the chip
- Support for one or more of the common async-based task scheduling frameworks, likely Embassy

For the foreseeable future, I will be testing this only on the BeagleBone AI-64. It is probably
applicable to other boards and SoCs but I don't yet know. Most of what I have written should work
for any Cortex-R5.

I can't make any promises on future expansion; if nothing else, I hope it's a helpful reference for
others' work.

## Why would you want bare metal Rust on coprocessor cores?

The TDA4VM chips target embedded deep learning applications. This makes them very attractive for
mobile robotics applications. However, embedded robotics platforms are minimally useful without
control of actuators and sensors. Linux on Cortex-A cores is great for ease of use with high-level
libraries and tools, but introduces unpredictable scheduling latency, high syscall overhead, and
challenges in software reliability.

For these reasons, I much prefer running control loops, simple sensor fusion and safety-critical
logic in a bare-metal environment. The R5F cores provide an excellent opportunity for this
application, since they have immediate shared memory access and synchronization primitives to
interact with the host CPU.

I'm interested in embedded Rust and its robotics applications, so I figured this would be a good
avenue to explore.

## Setup

```
rustup target add armv7r-none-eabihf
cargo install cargo-make
```

You will also need the arm-none-eabi binutils from Arm available on your PATH (for arm-none-eabi-ld).

## Usage

Build the demo app:

```
cargo make build
cargo make link
```

Copy the demo app to the device:

```
scp ./target/armv7r-none-eabihf/debug/demo_app.elf debian@beaglebone.local:~/
```

Run the demo app (on-device):

```
cp demo_app.elf /lib/firmware/

echo stop | sudo tee /dev/remoteproc/j7-main-r5f1_0/state
# Ignore "Invalid argument" errors here; this likely means the core is already stopped
echo demo_app.elf | sudo tee /dev/remoteproc/j7-main-r5f1_0/firmware
echo start | sudo tee /dev/remoteproc/j7-main-r5f1_0/state

sudo ls /dev/remoteproc/j7-main-r5f1_0/device/remoteproc/
# Note which remoteproc node name is printed, and substitute it below
# trace0: main debug log
sudo cat /sys/kernel/debug/remoteproc/remoteproc18/trace0
# trace1: panic log
sudo cat /sys/kernel/debug/remoteproc/remoteproc18/trace1
```

## Prior art, references and thanks

I'm reimplementing needed logic from scratch, since there is no canonical Cortex-R runtime,
startup code or other infrastructure for Rust. However, I've drawn on the following as inspiration
and prior art:

- https://github.com/kaofishy/bbai64_cortex-r5_example
- https://github.com/paoloteti/cortex-r-rt
- https://github.com/japaric/ultrascale-plus/tree/master/firmware
- https://github.com/japaric/rm42/tree/master/rt

Additional thanks to Nishanth Menon for help with the family of chips.
